Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
Tellerik create compelling app experiences
across any screen with the
Tellerik platform Telerx end to
end platform. Uniquely combines industry
leading UI tools with cloud
services to simplify the entire
app development cycle Tellerik offers
everything.net developers need to build
quality apps faster. Try it
free at tellerik.com/platform that's tellerik.com/platform.
One more thing. Let me
tell you about a new
sponsor Regan. If you're wanting
to detect and diagnose errors
and crashes in your software,
even find problems that you
didn't know existed to improve
your software and Reagan might
be perfect for you. He
had a few lines of
code your application, and in
minutes, you'll get real time
error reports with all the
information that you need to
fix bugs fast, you can
even hook it up to
your team chat, bug tracking
development, workflow tools, Reagan covers
all major web and mobile
programming languages, including.net, the full
Xamarin stack JavaScript, and many
more. Go check out Reagan
today@reagan.io. I used this myself
on my little startup and
I really, really recommend this
product. It is a great,
great product. Check it out.
Ray gun@reagan.io.  from hanselminutes.com.
It's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman. This is
Lawrence Ryan announcing show number four
69. In this episode, Scott
talks with Ryanne Lewis about
the state of Bitcoin. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes and we're on with
Rianne Lewis, who is the
co-creator of count my crypto.
And also you have a
group in London, don't you
about cryptography? Ah, yes. Hi
Scott. I'm really, really happy
to be on the show.
The group that I cohost
in London is London women
in Bitcoin. Obviously there's a
gender imbalance in Bitcoin, as
there sometimes tends to be
throughout the tech community. And
my group has just aimed
at making women feel very
welcome within the Bitcoin community
and educating people about this
technology. And you have a
bachelor of science in economics,
and you've always been interested
in financial systems. And then
your day job is as
a software engineer. So you've
got a you're coming at
it from multiple. Yes, that's
right. I mean, if you
like to see it this
way, Bitcoin and the technology
surrounding it, it's a natural
focus for me with a
kind of recreational interest in
economics and also a day
job as an engineer. So
I'm kind of interested in
all aspects of it, as
well as the community focused
aspects. It seems like when
I talked to the technical,
but not crypto technical. So
like, you know, the average
software engineer, like those that
might be listening to this
show right now, they will
just say, well, you know,
Bitcoin is a, it's a
bubble, right? It's all just
nonsense. It's it's it's and
they laugh about it. But
when I speak to them,
I find that they don't
have any Bitcoin. They don't
really understand it at all.
So it seems like something
that's easy on its surface
to poke at, but do
you think that that's unwarranted?
I think that's absolutely true.
I think people within the
tech community, they are obviously
aware of what goes on
with kind of technology to
a greater degree than the
average person in the street.
But, and they're likely to
have heard the word or
to have had heard other
people dismiss it, maybe, but
maybe not thought a lot
about it. I've actually been
quite surprised meeting people, obviously
in my day job and
Bitcoin, whatever, you know, not,
not particularly interested in it.
Everyone's kind of got some
kind of opinion on it,
but it's not necessarily an
informed opinion, but often people
are very interested when you
start talking about it. And
occasionally you do come across
people who actually do know
quite a lot about it,
but just haven't talked about
it at worker. I did
a contract recently where I
was working with one guy
and, you know, we used
to chat and it was
only towards the end of
my contract that it actually
turns out he had his
own cryptocurrency startup. We laughed
about that and we've actually
been in touch since, but
it was just quite funny
cause we'd both kind of,
not really chatted about it
that much. So maybe there
are people doing things who
don't talk about it. Maybe
there are people who know
a little and are dismissive
and then you get the
group of people who may
be mined a little about
it. Mine's a little lost
interest and haven't, don't really
participate in kind of Bitcoin
events or talks or whatever.
Do you think that you
have to be an engineer
to be in cryptocurrency? Absolutely
not. But I do think
you have to have an
interest in the technology. I
think the critical thing for
me is if, if you
think of it in terms
of as fit money, I
E typical country based currencies
like the dollar or the
pound, you don't need to
know anything about economics to
pull out your credit card
or pull out a dollar
or pull out a pound
and spend it in the
same way. You don't need
to know about technology to
use Bitcoin, but I don't
really agree with dumbing down
what it is because handing
somebody a Bitcoin wallets and
saying, or helping them set
it up and saying, now
go out and buy Bitcoin
without explaining the risks, the
technology it's like pulling the
pin out of a hand
grenade and handing it to
somebody. If you don't explain
how to operate proper security,
for example, or the fact
that there's nobody to go
to in the case of
you losing your private key
or something like that, I
think it can be very
dangerous to give people the,
the impression that it's kind
of risk-free and that you
can give them like a
nice phone wallets with a
groovy interface and that they
can keep unlimited amounts of
Bitcoin on it. I think
people do need to understand
a little about the technology
behind it. Now, when I
have a, a country backed
currency, a, a standard piece
of currency, I either have
it in my hand or
I have someone hold onto
it for me. And then
it's backed up by, you
know, the gold standard or
whatever. But I don't really
think about losing my money.
I suppose, as a computer
person, I might be, I
should be afraid that some
row in a database somewhere
is going to cost me
money when my credit union
or my, my building society
loses my losing my loses
my money. But I'm always
hearing about cryptography and cryptocurrency
as it relates to losing
this money. Why, why do
I not think about misplacing
dollars? But I think about
misplacing cryptocurrency, I think a
lot of it depends on
where you happen to be
in the world. I mean,
I'm in the United States and
in the UK, we haven't
had recent events where there
have been a run on
the banks, for example. But
in fact, in the UK,
in 2008, there was a
run on one bank, Northern
rock, which was then bought
by another bank and helped
out by the government. But
the government stepped in to
prevent disaster. But in many
ways, people are quite complacent
about other currencies, world currencies,
as it were like the
dollar and the pounds or
the ruble or whatever, but
recent events in Russia have
shown that, you know, perhaps
normal in quotes, currencies, aren't
quite as safe as people
think. And it's fascinating that
certainly people I've met there
seems to be in a
greater number of people who
are interested and aware of
Bitcoin from countries where there's
been financial instability, because maybe
they tend to see it
as less of a risk
than perhaps their own currency.
It's all about perception. Really.
It is all about perception.
And of course you, if
you hold Bitcoin, you hold
it yourself. You're not giving
it to somebody else. A
lot of people don't realize
that their money in the
bank is not in fact
their own money. They are
a creditor of the bank,
so that if anything happens
to the bank, it's not
your money that you're retrieving
the bank chooses whether to
pay it back to you.
And of course there are
guarantees I'm not kind of
scaremongering or anything like that.
I never scare monger. I'm
just saying that Bitcoin is
perhaps a more viable alternative
than a lot of people
realize when it comes to
taking responsibility for money. But
of course at the moment
it's a technology that's in
its infancy. It's very volatile.
So you obviously wouldn't, I
make sure that I don't
recommend to people who, you
know, Oh, go out and
buy a whole load of
Bitcoin because we've all seen
what happens to the price.
And it would be very
unfair of me to recommend
that people invest large sums
of money in Bitcoin when
it could be, well, I
mean, it's a $238 this
morning, and obviously it's been
up at over a thousand
dollars. It's volatiles. So for
me, a lot of the,
a lot of the importance
of Bitcoin is in transacting,
small amounts of money. I
mean, it has its value
as an investment, a place
where you can store money,
but it also has a
huge amount of value as
a transaction tool for smaller
amounts, especially for people who
might not have access to
traditional banks. The, the, the
point that you made just
a few moments ago about,
you know, the bank is
really holding my money, but
I am a credit to
the bank. That was an
interesting reminder. It's one of
those things that I think
we all intellectualize, but we
don't think about a whole
lot. Like if I have
more in the U S
more than $300,000 in the
bank, only 250,000 of that
is guaranteed. And that's guaranteed
simply by the government. So
there's a chain of trust
that goes all the way
up to, you know, do
we trust this country? And
to your point, depending on
the country, you live at
a, you may not trust
that country at all. Where
am I placing my trust?
If I am holding Bitcoin,
where is the, where is
the value? What is the
backing of that, that court?
Well, the, the point about
Bitcoin is that you don't
have to trust anyone because
it's the Bitcoin protocol. It's
well, it's a peer to
peer ledger. So nobody holds
the central ledger that you're
dependent on. The ledger is
decentralized and distributed among thousands
of notes. So in, in
less technical terms, this just
means that because a copy
of the ledger is held
in so many places, if
somebody tries in some way
to gain the system, the
blockchain, which is the underlying
technology that underpins Bitcoin corrects
itself. So for example, when
you send Bitcoin from one
Bitcoin address to another, that
requires multiple confirmations before the
transaction is deemed to have
thoroughly occurred. So you're, you're
not dependent on a bank,
on somebody in a bank
saying this money exists, and
I'm going to transfer it
here. You're not dependent on
a bank security systems. For
example, the power of Bitcoin
lies in its network. That's
the strength, the network effect.
Why is it so volatile
though? Why was it a
thousand? And why is it
two 50 now? Is that
this volatility in a currency?
Isn't that typically based on
the trust we put in
the backers of that currency.
So if I feel the
dollar is dropping, then that
means that general trust towards
the U S is less,
what are we not trusting
that is causing Bitcoin to
be so volatile? It's perhaps
not that simple. Although what
you say is, is true.
We've we certainly see it
with different world's currencies, but
it's not the whole picture
to one. One issue with
Bitcoin has been that because
the price started just so
low when it was first
mined, there's a fair amount
of concentration in the hands
of quite a few people.
And if people, as people,
as us people will understand
the principles of economics are
determined by supply and demand.
So if a whole load
of Bitcoin is suddenly released
onto the market, that will
cause the value to fall.
And maybe the demands might
not be that, pick it
up. The other thing is
that, but coin at the
moment, it's the majority of
the transactions that occur are
trade transactions. So it's people
speculating on the price and
people, and obviously the price
of Bitcoin will rise and
fall more. That there'll be
Wilder swings. If there are
a lot of people speculating
on the price. Whereas if
it was just purely in
demands as a transactional currency,
we'd see less volatility. But
what's very interesting is that
recently we've seen a lot
of large corporations announcing that
they will accept Bitcoin. For
example, Microsoft has, and you
know, companies like Virgin PayPal
for some purchases and you
would Dell, Dell's another famous
one. And you just assume
that when a company makes
this kind of announcement, intuitively
you'd think that this would
cause the price to rise.
In fact, we've seen the
reverse, which is counterintuitive, but
all this means is that
when say Microsoft decides to
accept coin people, who've got
Bitcoin will get all excited
about it, you know, wow,
that's so cool. I can
buy something with Bitcoin. So
they, they go off, they
buy something and then the
corporation will cash out the
Bitcoin. So for, for dollars.
So that will cause the
price to fall. That's one
theory. But of course the
other thing that you have
to remember is that cryptocurrency,
isn't all about Bitcoin. It's
the major part of the
story, but it's not the
whole story, Which is a,
actually two things that you
brought up there. I want
to get to the, the
other part of the story,
but also the disparity, there
was an article that's rather
a bit old, but it
implied that somewhere around a
thousand people own about half
the Bitcoins. It's a few
years old, this article, but
this idea that the long
tail is really, really long.
You know, a whole lot
of people own a Bitcoin
or two, but the early
adopters have, you know, many,
many, many tens of millions
of dollars to put it
into different terms. That disparity
can be a little bit
concerning. And we have no
way of knowing who those
people are. It could be
you for all we know
who has tens of millions
of dollars in Bitcoin. Is
that a, is that a
feature that, that there's such
a wealth disparity in this
new currency? I think it's
an interesting anomaly that over
time we'll probably level out,
but of course the anonymous
nature of the Bitcoin network
means that we will never
know exactly who owns what.
And that of course is
why Satoshi Nakamoto has, has
chosen to be anonymous. Well,
they've probably chosen to be
anonymous for a variety of
reasons, but people would theorize
that. That could be one
of the reasons we will
never know. I want to
take a moment to thank
our sponsors, sync, fusion, sync
fusions, mobile web, and desktop
controls are trusted worldwide, but
did you know that they
also provide educational resources? The
succinctly series of free eBooks
has great content on popular
technologies and 100 completely ad
free pages. These books are
written by industry experts and
topics range from Cassandra to
no JS to windows 8.1.
They are available for Kindle
apps and in PDF format
and new eBooks are released
each month. So Brown's their
library@syncfusion.com to download your free
ebook today. Now, to the
point about alternate currencies, Bitcoin
is, is the, the, the
name that we, the UN
the uninitiated like myself, you
know, used to refer to,
you know, cryptocurrency generally, just
like you might say, Hoover
for vacuum or Kleenex for
tissue. Bitcoin is becoming another
cryptocurrency general general now, but
there are alternate currencies, right?
They call them alt coins.
Yes, that's right. Alternate currencies
and alternate uses for the
blockchain, which I guess we
could chat about a bit
later because people sometimes say
that maybe Bitcoin, isn't the
killer app for the blockchain.
It's one application of blockchain
technology, but financial transactions, aren't
the end of the story.
I mean, we can come
to that later, but yes,
there are, I believe there
have now been more than
700 different cryptocurrencies, which is
a huge number on count.
My crypto, we carry just
over 500 because I pruned
from time to time to
get rid of some of
the kind of non-existent anymore
or pointless coins. But it's
interesting to see how the
whole thing's evolved certainly in
the year, since we've been
going it's you get different
types of currencies? The thing
is people in the Bitcoin
community are deeply skeptical as
a whole about the other
old coins, because they say
a lot of energies going
into alts that should probably
be going into Bitcoin and
focusing people on mainstream adoption.
But my view is that
it's kind of like this
amazing kind of melting pot
of creativity and experimentation. And
people are able to do
things with different salts points
that they wouldn't be able
to do with Bitcoin because
of where Bitcoin is. There's
a lot of inventive going
on and you have different
coins for different purposes. Like
one of the ones I'm
most interested in is folding
coin, which is actually a
medical research coin where people
in the network are using
their computational power to run
research into Alzheimer's disease, and
then exchange they're rewarded with
tokens for the amount of
effort they put in. So
instead of kind of using
up energy, Bitcoin mining, the
computation energy is going towards
something useful. So you have
ideas like that. You have
networks like MaidSafe, which is
basically an infrastructure network with
tokens, as well as all
the kind of community focused
coins. Like I guess almost
as many people have probably
heard of doge coin now,
as they've heard of Bitcoin,
and that's, it's just a
lovely community. They raise a
lot of money for charity.
There's a lot of tipping
that goes on because in
terms of microtransactions, cryptocurrencies are
just awesome for tipping people
and so on. There's a
lot of fun in the
altcoin community. There's a, that
there's a fair amount of
trading and speculation, and there's
genuine kind of economic endeavor
going on. As people push
the boundaries of what's possible.
They're all the anonymous type
coins like dark point black
coin. It's, it's interesting times
for adults. Of course, the
capital value of the adults
is a lot less than
Bitcoin, but in a way
that makes us a much
more risk-free environment for people
to experiment. You don't know
what's going to come out
of it. And also my
view is that if you
look at software and the
principles of iterative developments, I
don't know why we would
assume that Bitcoin, which was
first is the, is going
to always be the best
final product. It's, it's only
surely by people iterating over
these ideas and maybe possibly
coming up with something even
better that we might find
something out there that we
don't know about. The whole
point is everything's evolving so
quickly. We just don't know
what things are going to
look like in a years
time, let alone five or
10. It does bring up
an interesting question though. How
does one version occurrancy, this
is really all new ways
of thinking about, about value.
A D D does versioning
of currency mean it, one
dies and another one rises
and then, then we jump
from currency to currency. Well,
it's interesting. It's a, I
mean, for example, people are
already talking about Bitcoin 2.0
technology. So I guess, although
that's not, yeah, I guess
that's not really in, in
terms of a new version
of the currency, that's more
talking about the companies that
are revolving building probably nonfinancial
applications on the blockchain. There's
a new white boy. I
say new, there was a
white paper, came out recently
on the use of site
chains, which is worth the
read the w without going
too deeply into the technology
behind site chains. The point
is that people are making
the assumption that because blockchain
technology is so useful for
things other than just financial
transactions, it's going to be
used as a ledger system
for all kinds of things
in the future. And one
issue with this potentially is
bloat because you can't just
squeeze an infinite number of
transactions, infinite amounts of data
into the blockchain, even with
all the amazingly clever solutions
that Satoshi Nakamoto came up
with, like pruning and so
on. So the idea would
be to have kind of
block chain type chains that
run in parallel with the
main chain and then reentered
it at various points to
record kind of edited versions
of what happens in the
site chain so that they
would be attached to the
main blockchain, but they would
function as sort of separate
entities. I think that's a
really interesting thing. And that's
the big debate at the
moment is the value of
side chains against as opposed
to completely different blockchains. So
applying my own ignorance to
this, which is where I
can provide value, as you're
explaining this, I'm trying to
find parallels for the things
in my brain that I
do understand. So for example,
IPV four, we're running out
of IP addresses. So IPV
six comes along. It's a,
you know, and then they
say, we'll never run out,
but of course, surely we
will, at some point with,
with blockchain technology and a
lot of tiny, tiny microtransactions,
are you saying that it
is theoretically possible that we
could really kind of clutter
the ledger and side chains
are a way to get
around that? Yes, that's exactly
it. I mean, I think
people, there's, there's a lot
of, kind of unnecessary panic
around the idea of a
blockchain bloat, but I think
because there, there are kind
of ways to get around
it. For example, the transactions
that are the blocks that
were created way back are
now completely stable. I read
a really good analogy once
talking about blocks and the
blockchain has geological layers where
the I, which I think
has a really amazing visual
representation of it, where the
blocks at the bottom that
have had huge, huge numbers
of confirmations are completely static
and staple. The ones above
are still shifting slightly as
their composition changes and more,
more confirmations come in. And
the ones at the top
say when I've just, if
I just send you a
fraction of a Bitcoin, now
that would be a block
that would be changing for
some time. So the idea
would be the idea is
that the blocks at the
bottom get trimmed back because
you don't need that layer
of detail. And thus you
can reduce the size of
the blockchain, but with people
talking about using it for
quite trivial things, as well
as kind of legitimate uses,
yes, there has to be
some concern about blockchain, bloats
and side chains are a
way of getting around this.
It also makes me think
of, I was working on
a project today and I
realized that my get commit
log became quite quite nasty.
So I squashed about 15
commits into a smaller commit
just because it was just,
it was untidy. Yeah. Yeah.
That's, that's, that's a great
analogy. That's a great analogy.
And the technology exists to
do that. It's just side
chains, I think are interesting
and creative solution for the
types of application that might
be, might use the blockchain
in the future. For example,
people are talking about there's
been, there was an article
recently in Forbes, a guy
in London came up with
the idea of using the
blockchain as an ID ID
verification mechanism, because it's an
immutable ledger. So the idea
of identity on the blockchain
and also smart contracts, there's
a startup called Ethereum who
are doing some really interesting
things. The idea of using
the blockchain for contractual transactions
rather than financial transactions. It's
and it's surprising. I think
a lot of people I
speak to who think of
that kind of blockchain technologies
as a very fringe thing,
would be quite surprised if
they realize the level of
interest among traditional financial. I've
been to events where there
have been very senior people
from large retail banks looking
at blockchain technology because they
see it as a very
resilient low-cost transaction mechanism. It's
certainly not something that is
out there in terms of
being a very, very fringe
thing. I mean, it's, I
think it would be a
shame though, if these technologies
just became co-opted into existing
structures, because one of the
amazing things about, about the
coin and blockchain technology in
general is opening up this
ability to transact among people
who just don't have that
ability at the moment. And
it's no surprise really that
there are so many startups
targeting the developing world because
you have all these people
that it's not profitable for
the banks to deal with.
So they ended up being
abandoned and not able to
transact outside their smaller communities,
or they dependence on remittance
companies that charge large fees
or the various mobile phone
networks like in Pasa, in
Kenya, which again, people are
used to using their phones
for transmitting money in many
countries, but they get charged
for it. Whereas the transaction
fees with Bitcoin are incredibly
small. So you'd, you'd have
to see it as a
useful tool for people who
don't have access to traditional
banking. It's interesting, you've mentioned
that a number of times,
and I would think that
as, as software engineers, you
and I are certainly, you
know, in the, you know,
they always say the 1%,
maybe not the 1% per
easily, the 3%, you know,
we are, we are, we
have access, we have knowledge,
we have education, but you
have mentioned a number of
times that Bitcoin, which is
something that I would think
of as only the most
advanced software engineers having understanding
of, and you are saying
it is the, the, the
most, the most disadvantaged amongst
us that will benefit the
most from Bitcoin. If we
do this right, I believe
this, I believe this. I
mean, the worst thing of
all possible worlds with Bitcoin's
volatility would be people going
out and encouraging people who
didn't have very much money
to invest in, in something
that they didn't understand where
the price could drop. But
I do believe that the
price will stabilize over time.
And I also believe that
for transferring small amounts of
money and the, with the
current wave of phone wallets
and so on, it's just
incredibly easy. I mean, that,
that's, that's, that's the appeal
of it really. You don't,
as we sat right at
the beginning of our chat,
you don't need to be
technical in order to use
Bitcoin in the same way
that you don't need to
be technical in order to
use a credit card, you
can pull out your phone,
wallets, scan a QR code
on someone else's phone, send
the money. It's, it's incredibly
easy. And I use it
myself, just almost without thinking
about it. If, if I
want to buy something from
someone in the States, I'll
always ask if they have
a Bitcoin option, because it's
just really, really easy. So
it's, it's just so much
easier than using PayPal or
a bank or whatever you
get quite kind of lazy
about. You know, if, if
I then have to buy
something online with a credit
card, I'm like what I've
got to type in all
these numbers, I've got to
remember passwords, whatever. I can't
just scan this code and
go, you know, it's, it's
very, very user friendly technology.
One of the things that
I think is interesting that
I kind of want to
close on is that there's
a lot of concern again
from perhaps the uninitiated and
the uneducated. And I am
doing my very best to
learn about this myself is
that the misconception that Bitcoin
is completely an anonymous medium
of exchange. Therefore the bad
guys will do all of
their business with Bitcoin. Like
the terrorists are going to
win and it's because of
Bitcoin. But even though it's
like, if there's a kind
of anonymity, the ledger is
public, is it not? I
mean, it is. Then there
are ways to eventually get
down to the location of
a person. And they actually
used the Bitcoin public ledger
during the conviction of Russell
bricks and the silk road.
Absolutely. I mean, people, although
you can go to great
lengths to anonymize yourself, there
are much more efficient ways
than Bitcoin to be anonymous.
And I think the media
just loves to seize on
the idea of Bitcoin as
being this kind of thing
that the bad guys use
because it's anonymous in quotes.
Whereas in fact, I think
your average terrorist or criminal
is much more likely to
go and buy something with
dollars because that is a
lot more anonymous than Bitcoin.
I, I just, I just
think it's the hysteria over
it is a real shame
because it's clouding the genuine
opportunities for good, that is
offered at people, terrorists and
criminals make great headlines. What
else can I say? Yeah,
indeed it does. It seems
like simply taking a whole
lot of money and putting
it in a sack and
maybe wearing gloves when you
use, when you use your
money as a much more
anonymous way to do bad
things. Absolutely. It would be
really great to hear you
took this, although I'm a
software engineer and I've got
my alt coin of site
I'm, I'm not in any
way a Bitcoin engineer. It
would be great to hear
you talking to one of
the Bitcoin core developers sometime
because, you know, I must
emphasize I'm an interested lay
person, not a Bitcoin scientist
Indeed. And I appreciate you
saying that maybe you could
help make an introduction to
me and we'll have them
on the show sometime. Cool.
Cool, fantastic. Well, I really
appreciate you taking the time
Ryanne Lewis. She is a
cryptocurrency trader. She's a co-developer
of the website. Count my
crypto and also hosts co-hosts
the London Bitcoin women. Thanks
so much for chatting with
me today. Thank you so
much for having me. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.